Owen Derby
6.945 PS5
3/13/13

5.1: The provided success function always returns #f, after printing out the
     current dictionary of assignments. The subcalls to match:segment for the
     variables x and y from match:list will only succeed (and call the provided
     success function) if all the free 'b values are consumed in the
     pattern. Further, because of the or in the match segment, when the first
     success (x consumes none, y consumes all) returns a #f value (because we
     gave a success function which always returns #f), it will continue on and
     try having x consume 1 'b, and so on and so forth until all possible
     choices for x are exhausted, at which case match:list gives up and returns
     #f.

5.4: This restriction ensures that we only apply the commutative law at most
     once per candidate multiplication expression. Otherwise we would enter an
     infinite loop of expression simplifying, in which we repeatedly swapped the
     order in which we multiplied expressions.

5.5: The use of the ordering makes applying the simplification rules a minimally
     expensive task. Since we know that all numbers will be the first entries in
     any (sub) expression, we can just repeatedly look to simplify pairs of
     numbers at the beginning of any expression. Finally, we can check to
     simplify identity operations. If we didn't impose this sort of ordering,
     not only would we need to figure out a way to avoid repeatedly swapping the
     orderings of expressions, we would need to implement a way for the
     numerical simplification rules to search for pairs of numbers throughout
     entire sub-expressions. This would change the copmlexity of simplifying
     numerical expressions from being O(n) to O(n^2).

5.6: There are better sorting algorithms than bubble sort, which achieve nlogn
     time. However, it does not appear to be feasible to implement something
     like merge sort, or any other different sorting algorithm in the current
     framework, since they all have notions of intentionally moving elements to
     locations or merging more than 2 elements. However, we could see some
     improvements to our bubble-sort running time by "unrolling" the
     comparison. That is, we could add a rule for cummuting 3, or even 4
     elements, instead of only two. We'd still need to keep the 2 element
     cummutating, but if we could arrange it so that we mostly used the 3
     element rule, we'd cut down on the number of passes the sort takes
     (although we'd still need the same number of comparisons, so it's unclear
     just how much this would gain us).
